README.md, before:

![Pub Version](https://img.shields.io/pub/v/flutter_taggable)

Allow users to mention other users, insert hashtags, and tag other entities with this lightweight package. It provides a database-friendly format for easy storing and parsing of tags. The package is highly customizable and can be used with the standard `TextField` widget.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WesselvanDam/taggable/refs/heads/main/doc/taggable_screen_recording.gif" alt="Demo Video" height="480"/>

## Motivation

Many packages allow for tagging/mentioning users and the like in a text field, but not all are suitable for storing the tags in such a way that allows for easy retrieval and parsing. Imagine the following scenario:

> A user writes and posts the comment `@Ada Lovelace, check out this package!`. Suppose the backend server needs to parse this comment to send a notification to Ada. If the comment is stored as-is, two issues arise:
>
> 1. Where does the tag end? Is it `@Ada`, `@Ada Lovelace` or perhaps `@Ada Lovelace, check`? It is difficult to determine the exact tag.
> 2. If Ada changes her username to `@Ada King`, the comment would no longer tag her.

However, any taggable entity typically has a unique identifier, such as a user ID. This package allows for tagging users such that the frontend display is user-friendly, while providing a database-friendly format for easy parsing and retrieval.

## Features

- **Lightweight**: This package can be used with the standard [TextField](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/material/TextField-class.html) widget - you only need to replace the `TextEditingController` with a `TagTextEditingController`.
- **End-user friendly**: The controller handles the tagging logic, so you can focus on the UI. For example, backspacing over a tag deletes the entire tag, not just one character.
- **Customizable tag format**: Specify both the frontend format (e.g. `@Ada Lovelace`) and the backend format (e.g. `@123`). This package can also support multiple types of tagging (e.g. `@Ada Lovelace` and `#MyTrendingTopic`, see the video above).
- **Customizable search**: Specify how the package should search for tags, as well as how the options should be displayed.
- **Type annotations**: Give a type to the `TagTextEditingController` for better type safety and code completion when you define your callbacks.

## Getting started

This package assumes that your 'taggable' data comes in three forms:

1. A dataclass-like object that represents the taggable entity.
2. A representation of this entity that can be displayed in the UI.
3. A representation of this entity that can be stored in the database.

In the [example](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_taggable/example), we use the following class to represent a taggable entity:

```dart
class Taggable {
  const Taggable({required this.id, required this.name, required this.icon});

  final String id;
  final String name;
  final IconData icon;
}
```

The `id` is the unique identifier of the taggable entity, and the `name` is the string that will be displayed in the UI. Comparing this to WhatsApp, the taggable entity would be a user, the `id` would be the user's phone number, and the `name` would be the user's name.

The package supports having multiple types of taggable entities. To make the code less verbose, we recommend creating a class that extends `Taggable` for each type of taggable entity. For example:

```dart
class User extends Taggable {
  const User(
      {required super.id, required super.name, super.icon = Icons.person});
}

class Topic extends Taggable {
  const Topic(
      {required super.id, required super.name, super.icon = Icons.topic});
}
```

Alternatively, you can make the Taggable class have abstract methods that return the frontend and backend representations of the taggable entity, to be implemented by the subclasses.

## Usage

### Installation

Add the package to your project with the following command:

```bash
flutter pub add flutter_taggable
```

### Basic usage

To use the package, you need to replace the default `TextEditingController` with a `TagTextEditingController` and specify a couple of parameters;

```dart
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_taggable/flutter_taggable.dart';

class TaggableExample extends StatefulWidget {
  @override
  _TaggableExampleState createState() => _TaggableExampleState();
}

class _TaggableExampleState extends State<TaggableExample> {
  late TagTextEditingController _controller;

  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
    _controller = TagTextEditingController<Taggable>(
    searchTaggables: searchTaggables,
    buildTaggables: buildTaggables,
    toFrontendConverter: (taggable) => taggable.name,
    toBackendConverter: (taggable) => taggable.id,
    tagStyles: {
      '@': const TextStyle(color: Colors.blue),
      '#': const TextStyle(color: Colors.green),
    });
  }

  @override
  void dispose() {
    _controller.dispose();
    super.dispose();
  }

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
      appBar: AppBar(
        title: Text('Taggable Example'),
      ),
      body: Padding(
        padding: const EdgeInsets.all(16.0),
        child: TextField(
          controller: _controller,
          decoration: InputDecoration(
            hintText: 'Type @ to tag a user or # to tag a topic',
          ),
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
}
```

Note how the controller is type-annotated with the `Taggable` class. Several parameters need to be specified when creating the `TagTextEditingController`. Expand the section below for more information.

<details>
  <summary>Parameters</summary>

  ```dart
  FutureOr<Iterable<T>> Function(String prefix, String? query) searchTaggables
  ```

  This function is called whenever the user types a tag. It should return a list of taggable entities that match the query. The `prefix` parameter is the character that the user typed to start the tag, and the `query` parameter is the text that the user typed after the prefix. For example, if the user types `@Ada`, the `prefix` would be `@` and the `query` would be `Ada`. The return type is of `FutureOr` because the function can be both synchronous (if the data is already available) or asynchronous (if the data needs to be fetched from somewhere).

  ```dart
  Future<T?> Function(FutureOr<Iterable<T>> taggables) buildTaggables
  ```

  This function takes the list of taggable entities that match the query and builds the UI representation of these entities. In the [example](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_taggable/example), an `OverlayEntry` is used to display the options as a list. Because users typically select an option by tapping on it, the return type is a Future. The example uses a [Completer](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-async/Completer-class.html) to return the selected taggable entity, since an `OverlayEntry` does not return a value.

  ```dart
  String Function(T taggable) toFrontendConverter
  ```

  This function converts the taggable entity to a string that will be displayed in the UI. In the example, we use the `name` field of the `Taggable` class.

  ```dart
  String Function(T taggable) toBackendConverter
  ```

  This function converts the taggable entity to a string that will be stored in the database. In the example, we use the `id` field of the `Taggable` class.

  ```dart
  List<TagStyle> tagStyles
  ```

  This list specifies the ways users can tag entities. Each `TagStyle` object has a `prefix` that is used to trigger the tag ('@' by default), and a `style` that specifies the `TextStyle` of the tag in the text field. Additionally, it has a `regExp` parameter that specifies the regular expression that can be used to find the tag in the text field. Any string that succeeds the `prefix` and matches the `regExp` will be considered a tag. 

</details>

### Conversion

There are three processes in which the taggable entities are converted:

1. **Saving text with tags**: When a piece of text containing tags needs to be saved, you can use the `textInBackendFormat` getter of the `TagTextEditingController` to get the text in the backend format. Do not use the `text` getter, as the internal text representation is different from both the frontend and backend formats.
2. **Populating the text field**: When you have a piece of text in the backend format and want to populate the text field with it, you can use the `setInitialText` method of the `TagTextEditingController`. Besides the text, you need to provide function `backendToTaggable` that converts the backend format to the taggable entity. This function has the following signature:
```dart
FutureOr<T?> Function(String prefix, String backendString) backendToTaggable
```
3. **Displaying tags outside the text field**: Typically, content created with the `TagTextEditingController` will be displayed in a different widget, such as a comment section or chat thread. This package exposes a method `convertTagTextToInlineSpans` that converts the text with tags to a list of `InlineSpan` objects. The example shows how to use this method to display the text with tags in a `RichText` widget. While it covers most use cases, you may want to define your own conversion method for more complex scenarios.

## Additional information

### Migrating from 0.x to 1.x

Quite a few changes have been made in version 1.x of this package, for a couple of reasons:

 - The package now supports ways of tagging that do not require the tags to have whitespace on both sides.
 - The package now supports tagging entities that have the same frontend format. In the video above, two users named 'Alice' are tagged, but the backend representation still distinguishes between them.

It is recommended to read the documentation and the example to understand how to adapt your code to the new version.

### Limitations

 - This package attempts to respond intuitively to user interaction with tags in the text field, e.g. backspacing over a tag deletes the entire tag. However, the behaviour is not perfect, especially handling of the cursor position and selection ranges. If you encounter any issues, please open an issue on GitHub.


### Contributions

Contributions are welcome! If you have any suggestions or improvements, please open an issue or a pull request on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/WesselvanDam/taggable).

Commit message:

docs: add example app to ReadMe

README.md, after:

![Pub Version](https://img.shields.io/pub/v/flutter_taggable)

Allow users to mention other users, insert hashtags, and tag other entities with this lightweight package. It provides a database-friendly format for easy storing and parsing of tags. The package is highly customizable and can be used with the standard `TextField` widget. Try out the [example app](https://wesselvandam.github.io/taggable/) to see it in action!

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WesselvanDam/taggable/refs/heads/main/doc/taggable_screen_recording.gif" alt="Demo Video" height="480"/>

## Motivation

Many packages allow for tagging/mentioning users and the like in a text field, but not all are suitable for storing the tags in such a way that allows for easy retrieval and parsing. Imagine the following scenario:

> A user writes and posts the comment `@Ada Lovelace, check out this package!`. Suppose the backend server needs to parse this comment to send a notification to Ada. If the comment is stored as-is, two issues arise:
>
> 1. Where does the tag end? Is it `@Ada`, `@Ada Lovelace` or perhaps `@Ada Lovelace, check`? It is difficult to determine the exact tag.
> 2. If Ada changes her username to `@Ada King`, the comment would no longer tag her.

However, any taggable entity typically has a unique identifier, such as a user ID. This package allows for tagging users such that the frontend display is user-friendly, while providing a database-friendly format for easy parsing and retrieval.

## Features

- **Lightweight**: This package can be used with the standard [TextField](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/material/TextField-class.html) widget - you only need to replace the `TextEditingController` with a `TagTextEditingController`.
- **End-user friendly**: The controller handles the tagging logic, so you can focus on the UI. For example, backspacing over a tag deletes the entire tag, not just one character.
- **Customizable tag format**: Specify both the frontend format (e.g. `@Ada Lovelace`) and the backend format (e.g. `@123`). This package can also support multiple types of tagging (e.g. `@Ada Lovelace` and `#MyTrendingTopic`, see the video above).
- **Customizable search**: Specify how the package should search for tags, as well as how the options should be displayed.
- **Type annotations**: Give a type to the `TagTextEditingController` for better type safety and code completion when you define your callbacks.

## Getting started

This package assumes that your 'taggable' data comes in three forms:

1. A dataclass-like object that represents the taggable entity.
2. A representation of this entity that can be displayed in the UI.
3. A representation of this entity that can be stored in the database.

In the [example](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_taggable/example), we use the following class to represent a taggable entity:

```dart
class Taggable {
  const Taggable({required this.id, required this.name, required this.icon});

  final String id;
  final String name;
  final IconData icon;
}
```

The `id` is the unique identifier of the taggable entity, and the `name` is the string that will be displayed in the UI. Comparing this to WhatsApp, the taggable entity would be a user, the `id` would be the user's phone number, and the `name` would be the user's name.

The package supports having multiple types of taggable entities. To make the code less verbose, we recommend creating a class that extends `Taggable` for each type of taggable entity. For example:

```dart
class User extends Taggable {
  const User(
      {required super.id, required super.name, super.icon = Icons.person});
}

class Topic extends Taggable {
  const Topic(
      {required super.id, required super.name, super.icon = Icons.topic});
}
```

Alternatively, you can make the Taggable class have abstract methods that return the frontend and backend representations of the taggable entity, to be implemented by the subclasses.

## Usage

### Installation

Add the package to your project with the following command:

```bash
flutter pub add flutter_taggable
```

### Basic usage

To use the package, you need to replace the default `TextEditingController` with a `TagTextEditingController` and specify a couple of parameters;

```dart
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_taggable/flutter_taggable.dart';

class TaggableExample extends StatefulWidget {
  @override
  _TaggableExampleState createState() => _TaggableExampleState();
}

class _TaggableExampleState extends State<TaggableExample> {
  late TagTextEditingController _controller;

  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
    _controller = TagTextEditingController<Taggable>(
    searchTaggables: searchTaggables,
    buildTaggables: buildTaggables,
    toFrontendConverter: (taggable) => taggable.name,
    toBackendConverter: (taggable) => taggable.id,
    tagStyles: {
      '@': const TextStyle(color: Colors.blue),
      '#': const TextStyle(color: Colors.green),
    });
  }

  @override
  void dispose() {
    _controller.dispose();
    super.dispose();
  }

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
      appBar: AppBar(
        title: Text('Taggable Example'),
      ),
      body: Padding(
        padding: const EdgeInsets.all(16.0),
        child: TextField(
          controller: _controller,
          decoration: InputDecoration(
            hintText: 'Type @ to tag a user or # to tag a topic',
          ),
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
}
```

Note how the controller is type-annotated with the `Taggable` class. Several parameters need to be specified when creating the `TagTextEditingController`. Expand the section below for more information.

<details>
  <summary>Parameters</summary>

  ```dart
  FutureOr<Iterable<T>> Function(String prefix, String? query) searchTaggables
  ```

  This function is called whenever the user types a tag. It should return a list of taggable entities that match the query. The `prefix` parameter is the character that the user typed to start the tag, and the `query` parameter is the text that the user typed after the prefix. For example, if the user types `@Ada`, the `prefix` would be `@` and the `query` would be `Ada`. The return type is of `FutureOr` because the function can be both synchronous (if the data is already available) or asynchronous (if the data needs to be fetched from somewhere).

  ```dart
  Future<T?> Function(FutureOr<Iterable<T>> taggables) buildTaggables
  ```

  This function takes the list of taggable entities that match the query and builds the UI representation of these entities. In the [example](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_taggable/example), an `OverlayEntry` is used to display the options as a list. Because users typically select an option by tapping on it, the return type is a Future. The example uses a [Completer](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-async/Completer-class.html) to return the selected taggable entity, since an `OverlayEntry` does not return a value.

  ```dart
  String Function(T taggable) toFrontendConverter
  ```

  This function converts the taggable entity to a string that will be displayed in the UI. In the example, we use the `name` field of the `Taggable` class.

  ```dart
  String Function(T taggable) toBackendConverter
  ```

  This function converts the taggable entity to a string that will be stored in the database. In the example, we use the `id` field of the `Taggable` class.

  ```dart
  List<TagStyle> tagStyles
  ```

  This list specifies the ways users can tag entities. Each `TagStyle` object has a `prefix` that is used to trigger the tag ('@' by default), and a `style` that specifies the `TextStyle` of the tag in the text field. Additionally, it has a `regExp` parameter that specifies the regular expression that can be used to find the tag in the text field. Any string that succeeds the `prefix` and matches the `regExp` will be considered a tag. 

</details>

### Conversion

There are three processes in which the taggable entities are converted:

1. **Saving text with tags**: When a piece of text containing tags needs to be saved, you can use the `textInBackendFormat` getter of the `TagTextEditingController` to get the text in the backend format. Do not use the `text` getter, as the internal text representation is different from both the frontend and backend formats.
2. **Populating the text field**: When you have a piece of text in the backend format and want to populate the text field with it, you can use the `setInitialText` method of the `TagTextEditingController`. Besides the text, you need to provide function `backendToTaggable` that converts the backend format to the taggable entity. This function has the following signature:
```dart
FutureOr<T?> Function(String prefix, String backendString) backendToTaggable
```
3. **Displaying tags outside the text field**: Typically, content created with the `TagTextEditingController` will be displayed in a different widget, such as a comment section or chat thread. This package exposes a method `convertTagTextToInlineSpans` that converts the text with tags to a list of `InlineSpan` objects. The example shows how to use this method to display the text with tags in a `RichText` widget. While it covers most use cases, you may want to define your own conversion method for more complex scenarios.

## Additional information

### Migrating from 0.x to 1.x

Quite a few changes have been made in version 1.x of this package, for a couple of reasons:

 - The package now supports ways of tagging that do not require the tags to have whitespace on both sides.
 - The package now supports tagging entities that have the same frontend format. In the video above, two users named 'Alice' are tagged, but the backend representation still distinguishes between them.

It is recommended to read the documentation and the example to understand how to adapt your code to the new version.

### Limitations

 - This package attempts to respond intuitively to user interaction with tags in the text field, e.g. backspacing over a tag deletes the entire tag. However, the behaviour is not perfect, especially handling of the cursor position and selection ranges. If you encounter any issues, please open an issue on GitHub.


### Contributions

Contributions are welcome! If you have any suggestions or improvements, please open an issue or a pull request on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/WesselvanDam/taggable).
